>> Kyle Simpson: Welcome everyone
to JavaScript the recent parts.
We have looked in other courses
here on Frontend Masters at
the deeper prospectives on JavaScript,
the deep core foundations.
But it is quite easy to
focus on those parts and
then feel like JavaScript
is leaving you behind.
And some of you have heard this
term before, JavaScript fatigue,
feeling like my goodness, this language is
changing so fast, it seems like every few
months there's a whole new blog
post about a whole new feature and
how I can possibly keep up?
And some people have gone to the extreme
here and almost rebuild against any sort
of keeping up with JavaScript like
JavaScript changing too fast.
Some people have proposed that
JavaScript should stop like
a moratorium on new features for
some period of time, so
there's varying degrees of
reaction to this quick pace.
So just a quick bit of contextual
history here, JavaScript for
a long period of time went through what
we would disaffectionately refer to
as the dark ages.
That was the period of time
between ES3 and ES5 and
that was actually a full decade.
From 1999 to 2009, essentially nothing
happened in the JavaScript language.
And during that same period of time,
a lot of things happened in the broader
web ecosystem where, for example,
Internet Explorer 6 had come out and
then stagnated for more than 5 years.
No updates,
no changes to the web platform.
And many people became very frustrated and
started up whole new browsers.
I mean, we have Mozilla and Chrome and
all these because of this stagnation
in the web that coincided with or
fell in the middle of the stagnation
of JavaScript, the language.
Now the reason for that stagnation was
actually a lot of political infighting.
They were trying to work on the ES4
spec and they were divisions and
they couldn't figure it out and
they basically just departed.
They went back to their neutral sites and
didn't make any updates
because they couldn't agree.
And then they came back
together finally in 2009, and
they said we're not gonna have any of
these big factions or disagreements.
We're gonna have this one JavaScript
policy which is everybody agrees that we
don't put something in the spec unless we
all agree that it's gonna be faithfully
implemented.
And by that point there were
a lot more stakeholders,
a lot more browsers both mobile and
desktop, or
even starting to get stakeholders
that are not browsers at all.
Other environments like Node.js and
things like that.
And so, they had a lot more people
at the table at that point,
they said the best thing for JavaScript
is that JavaScript is one JavaScript.
That there isn't this case
like we had in the IE6 days.
Where there's the different JavaScript
running in the IE browser than
is running for
example in a Mozilla browser.
So they said no more of that, we have
to agree that there's one JavaScript.
And this was a tremendously
important inflection point for
the history of JavaScript.
And its signaled since we've got our
process back together, we figured out
the kinks, if you will, and now we have
people agreeing to work towards progress.
So it's seem very hopeful like year five
is the signal the JavaScript is gonna
restart the wheels and move forward.
And then 2010 and 2011 and 12 and 13 have
gone by and here we are 3 or 4 years.
And nothing has changed
about JavaScript again.
No that they are doing work,
they were doing lots of work but they were
discussing vehemently disagreeing and
trying to work out the issues for
all of those things that were
actually the problems with ES4.
So they were revisiting these issues and
saying,
these are all still things that
we wanna do with the language.
We wanna move the language forward to be
a full class programming language and
there a lot of features that we
wanna add to language to do that.
So that it can be seen as equal to any
of other major programming languages.
And so, there was a lot of disagreement
about each individual feature and
it took months and sometimes years for
them to work out these differences.
But the end result was that
we didn't get an ES6 or
ES2015, we didn't get that
land until late 2015.
So 2009 to 2015,
we have 2009 to 2015 of 6 years.
We had a decade of no change, and
then six years since
Java Script had been updated.
And at that point when they landed ES6,
and
they had all these changes, and
boy there was a lot of changes.
Something like over 300 new features or
tweaks from small things to giant whole
new features, like modules and classes.
Major stuff and
even tiny little helper APIs and
little syntax and stuff like that.
So it's this big, big change that
felt like it had been pending not for
6 years but for 16 years.
There's this frustration like we've gotta
force all of this stuff into the language.
And naturally,
there was a bunch of blow back.
Like you just completely
changed the entire language and
now every blog post that I read I can't
even understand what they're writing cuz
there's all these like arrow symbols all
over the place and dots dots everywhere.
And I don't even know what
this JavaScript is people say,
this is not the JavaScript I grew up with,
right?
And so
there was this push back that said well,
how do we get a process where JavaScript
can evolve, that it doesn't stagnate,
that we don't wait for ten or
even six years to get features?
But we also don't show up with this
massive load that we just dump on people
and then nobody can process it and
even to this day four years later,
people are still reeling
from the change set of ES6.
And so in that ES6 process they also
voted to say the healthiest thing for
our language is not to stagnate.
It's also not to collect things
up into some symbolic thing like,
this is version six of the language,
and this version seven of the language.
But rather they felt like
the healthiest thing for
JavaScript is to move
forward little by little.
Incrementally, like a train leaving
the station every 15 minutes, on time,
every year,
the JavaScript spec is gonna come out.
And they reflected that
even in the naming.
They changed officially
the name of the language.
So when the update to
JavaScript came in 2016,
that wasn't ES7, that was ES2016.
And then another update came in 2017 and
2018, and
even just within the last few weeks,
we got an official update called ES2019.
Now, just as a little bit of nuance there,
they vote in the early part of the year,
and then by mid year,
it's officially ratified by ECMA,
the organization that manages standards.
So we at the current moment
of this course or in-between,
we have voted on what those specs are,
but they have to be officially ratified.
That's essentially a rubber
stamp at this point, so
we know what ES2019 is gonna look like.
And they're already talking about things
that are gonna happen in ES2020 and
in 2021.
Nobody knows when a feature is gonna
land until it reaches the final stage.
There are 5 stages of the TC39
proposal process from 0 to 4,
and stage 4 means done, finished,
shipped, it's complete.
So anything that makes stage four
by that earlier vote, January or
February of a year,
anything that has reached the stage four
by the end of that meeting is in for
that year.
And if it's on stage three or
before it's not in, but
it'll still be on the next train or
the next train or the next train.
So they setup this process and
said, let's keep proposals moving
independently rather than having
to keep everything in a gate.
And let these proposals move as quickly or
as slowly as is appropriate.
Because some features we know pretty well,
it's a small define surface area
let's just move forward with it and
some things are huge and
it may take years for us to figure out.
And one of the big
challenges with JavaScript,
backwards compatibility means once
something is in it's in, right?
We don't back stuff out of the language
because then we could break websites.
So there's a tremendous pressure and
responsibility that when something
goes in that it's really ready.
That it's been documented, that it's
been researched, that it's been tested,
that it's been implemented multiple times,
so that we know the engines can do it.
So they put in all of this structure and
process to say, let's get on a better
train, where every year
are continually evolving the language.
And that's where our status quo is today,
that each year we see
a variety of different features
from tiny little tweaks,
like in ES2019 they made some very
nuanced tweaks to jsons.stringify.
The way it handles Unicode character
encoding, not something that is probably
pressing on most developers minds,
but important nonetheless.
And then we have big features which one of
them will talk about, like flat mapping,
that's a big feature especially
if your functional programmer.
You love having the ability
to do flat mapping, and so
we get API then we get tiny little
tweaks and everything in between.
And so we're hoping that we never see
either of the two things that have
happened over the last 16 years.
We're hoping that we never see a long
period of time of nothing happening.
And we're also hoping that we never see
a year show up where just everything
dumps on everyone and we're overwhelmed.
So that fatigue that people
are feeling is understandable.
But in a sense, the alternatives
are much worse for our industry.
The alternative is that if JavaScript
stopped evolving to give everybody time
to catch up, then JavaScript's gonna
get surpassed by something else.
We already seen in a sense
existential threats to JavaScript
as an authoring language when we
think about things like Web Assembly.
More and more people are saying well,
I don't even need to write that in
JavaScript, I can write it in Go or
Rust or some other language and
just go write to the browser and
skip the JavaScript language entirely.
So if JavaScript the language wants to
continue to be a vital part of the web,
it has to continue to evolve.
I don't subscribe to the belief that we
are approaching some final end point for
JavaScript.
It's gonna continue to evolve,
we may not be adding huge new
features every single year.
We may be slowing down on the big changes.
But then again, we might be adding huge
changes like someday we may be talking
about adding static types to JavaScript,
or
we may be talking about
adding macros to JavaScript.
There are a number of features that I'm
very hopeful for like pattern matching,
and the optional chaining operators so
that you don't have to check for
undefined at each level
of a property access.
Those are great features,
they are in various stages and
moving their way towards
getting on the train.
So those things will continue
to happen for the language.